---
title: Notes on quality
date: 2024-04-05T13:09:08.336Z
summary: A guide to the acquiring the good things in Life
draft: false
featured: false
image:
  filename: featured
  focal_point: Smart
  preview_only: false
---
Understanding the traits of high quality is a skill that can save you time, effort, money, health and energy. In our consumerist world, quality is often conflated with broken parameters like price and brand-name. While these may not necessarily be false, often the objects of *true, highest quality* aren’t so easy to procure (hence the terms “hidden gem”, “diamond in the rough”). I’m going to outline what I think are the abstract traits of high and low quality items, so as to apply it as broadly as possible. This can apply to food, film, picking the right college, a good car, a potential romantic partner or even as a guide to bettering yourself.

There are always four tiers of quality, and we’ll run through them bottom to top:

1. ***Rock bottom:*** Something that’s an obviously shit product. You can see it in the way attention is paid to detail. Tacky taste, poor choice, no sense of flavor. Lowest quality just exists for the sake of existing and is a trend follower trying to lap up whatever it can get. It has no desire to improve or be anything particular. Rock bottom is often tacky, in poor taste, gaudy and gimmicky, possesses poor values and is associated with a scummy type of individual. Most people can avoid rock bottom after one to two experiences with a product of that nature. Avoid Rock bottom at all costs because you will catch something bad from engaging with it, and don’t ignore its obvious red flags.
2.  ***Branding guru:*** Mediocrity trying to pass off as quality. You can see it in the way they try to ambitiously project themselves as something they are not. Often this entails put a very shiny image of themselves out there in everyone’s faces, bragging from the mountaintops. You will purchase it because of how impressive the branding is, but branding gurus are dangerous because of their ability to manipulate your perception. If something new is pushing some unearned prestige in your face, it’s trying to force a perception of itself as something it is NOT. The Branding Guru is a trap that a lot of people fall for due to low self-confidence, poor taste, poor self esteem and most sadly of all, lack of means to afford better. If there's too much branding, be wary of it.
3. ***Old guard:*** Something that was once good but now that it has established it’s reputation, has sunk to mediocrity or even absymal  quality compared to their an earlier stage in their lifecycle. However, they are still, to many degrees, better than the brand guru in terms of quality. The old guard is often the glass ceiling that people stop at when assessing quality, because they often get to know of the Old guard either at the peak of its popularity or in its decline. To spot the Old Guard, try to see how they coast by on their reputational legacy as opposed to the quality of their current outcomes. You will find that the current batch of working coming out of there is quite mediocre or poor versus the money, time or energy going in. Old Guard may still possess a semblance of decent quality, but as time goes on and you experience a higher diversity of things, you will find that the price is often unjustifiable, and the reputation is now increasingly undeserved.
4. ***Hidden gem:*** This is the gold that lies buried in a field. Hidden gems are esoteric , well kept secrets. They are often niche and of highly acquired taste and sense. Not everyone has the ability to spot and appreciate a hidden gem at the same time, which is why a hidden gem is often always out of the picture. The quality of a hidden gem is obvious if you can look past it’s not so attractive exterior. That’s why it’s “hidden”, but not hidden intentionally. Rather, hidden gems are those hidden in plain sight and are ignored because they aren’t understood by the masses with little to no taste. Those “in the know”, ***know.***

### Common traits of high quality:

1. ***High quality is never cheap, free, overpriced or unaffordable***: Instead, high quality often comes at a price worth paying. If something is cheap or free, it’s either a race to the bottom where they are trying to get attract as many people as they can, or there’s a hidden cost that they aren’t inclined to directly share with you. If it’s overpriced, it’s trying to use its lack of affordability as a marketing tool to push an image of luxury. If it’s unaffordable, then the actual goal is to milk the newly rich by appealing to be a symbol of wealth and social status. Whatever it is, it’s a gimmick. The above-market-rate premium aspect of quality comes from the desire to share products of loving effort with as many people as possible combined with the healthy self confidence that their product is definitely above average. 
2. ***High quality is always a product of the labor of long periods of selfless passion:*** Getting good at something is never an easy process, and it takes huge stretches of laborious repetitive time and mountains of directed effort. This can only be measured in terms of years and decades, never months (so always look for signs of richness as a product of age). The pursuit of money, fame and attention will lead to mediocrity at best and a fad at worst. This is because… 
3. ***High quality is product of true authenticity*** : Because high quality is of true passion, it always also tends to be true to itself. This means that high quality never tries to appeal to the entire planet, and instead has a unique flavor that can only be spoken of as acquired taste. High quality is not for everyone to enjoy or appreciate. Because of said commitment to authenticity, it’s polarizing, and as a result there will be people who speak of it well and people who don’t. Because of this authenticity they’re not good at marketing themselves as flawless, because even high quality authentic things have tiny chips and cracks. 
4. ***You have to work for it***: Real quality doesn’t have to justify itself. That’s why you have to work for it, whether it’s putting in the effort to find it, paying the necessary toll to experience it or developing the taste to recognize and appreciate it. High quality requires work to attain it, and furthermore requires a high degree of open-mindedness to actually enjoy it. It will not fall in your lap and jerk you off. You have to put the work in to earn its rewards. This includes acknowledgement that sometimes, you may not be ready for what high quality is, and that itself requires humility to acknowledge that you are still learning. 5
5. ***High quality is not in the packaging, but the material***: There’s a lot of things that convince you of their quality via their packaging, but the proof of an object’s quality is the quality of its inner material. High quality material is the only thing that needs to convince you as it will be a form of long-term sustenance. If something is too shiny, chances are high that it’s not gold. On the other hand, diamond doesn’t lose its value just because it hasn’t been cut yet. Poor presentation definitely means low quality, but unassuming bland-esque presentation can be a mask of high quality. It’s often the case that high quality is so focused on the content that packaging is an afterthought. High quality often has an effortless appearance, as opposed to the tacky gimmicky nature of low quality. You will also often know the quality of a product not in the immediate experience, but in the quality of its retrospective aftertaste (and this is often the defining factor). 
6. ***High quality has a small circle of high, well articulated praise and expert testimonial***: You can always measure the quality of something by the audience that surrounds it. If a LOT of people have high praise for something, what it usually implies is strong branding of the herd-like masses that don’t know any better. Expert testimonials are important because experts are people who have developed strong nasal bullshit detectors via refined taste. If something has a very unassuming appearance but has a small circle of high praise AND celebrated expert testimonials, you can be damn sure it’s good. The testimonial of commoners means nothing as that person is usually speaking from a lack of experience, taste or even direct experience with the craft itself. Critics may be elitist, but critics are necessary to maintain high standards. 
7. ***High quality isn’t necessarily where you expect to find it***: The strangest aspect of high quality is that it’s always “tucked away” in some shape or form, lending only those curious enough to venture and take a chance to experience it. There’s few to no leads as to where high quality resides, but one thing common to all high quality things is that it’s never really out in the open. 
8. **\*High quality is often against trends, fads and what’s popular**:* There’s always a certain “normative” popularity standard that floats around in the mainstream, and the highest of quality often lies outside that standard of popularity, and in some cases actively butts heads with it. If people are actively choosing one place, cuisine or trend continuously, stay curious and be open-minded to fringe experiences. 
9. ***High quality pays attention to detail***: Often, high quality items pay a significant amount of effort into density of detail. How someone approaches the little things that are easy to fix is indicative of how they approach the big things which are a lot more effort. Quality is often quality of information which is an expression in the tiny details, not the grand overall experience. 
10. ***You can only know it via direct experience. Assessing quality is always a leap of faith***: You can always fall for mimics and poor attempts. There’s no surefire way to know of quality except in its experience. All the above signs could be present and yet the final outcome could still be mediocre. On the other hand, maybe the outcome has nothing in common with the above and it’s still good shit. These are more like guidelines for quality and less like rules. 

### Why you need to experience things of true quality 

1. ***Quality changes the way you think:*** Experiencing quality changes the way you think in many profound ways, especially in the phase of developing the taste to understand it. Good quality is understood in the moment, but great quality is understood in retrospect. It transforms your character and attitude to life in ways you may not directly perceive or understand. This transformative capacity of objects of good taste is why you need to seek them out in all spheres of life. It literally makes you a better person overall. 
2. ***Poor quality is venom, mediocrity is a slow poison, Brands and legacy are hidden traps:*** Life is short and it’s a bad idea to sit around skirting between things of poor and mediocre quality. Low quality will actually destroy you insidiously, while mediocrity wastes your time. Without developing good taste, you will always be stuck in a never-ending spiral of praising the mediocre, never knowing what true quality is. Legacy is even worse, which may give you decent quality product that is not worth the high price you pay for it. 
3. ***Knowing High quality is both a sign of and stepping stone to growth:*** Immature people often have immature, trend driven taste. When you develop a strong taste for refined delicacy, it helps you build a tough mindset that can see things clearly. 

### Signs of gift wrapped shit 

No one likes to have their flaws be shown to all out in the open. There's always a hidden advantage to trying to appear as someone you are not, it's how humans play the social field. When trying to differentiate high quality from a knock-off, there's always a decent shopping list of signs you can check off. Gift-wrapped shit is the most dangerous thing to encounter in the wild and is a targeted practice of manipulation. If something that looks high quality comes to your doorstep without you putting in *any* effort to attain it, it's very likely BS.

1. **Tryhard** (Trying too hard to be something and push it in your face. Quality is often pursued and it knows it should be pursued. So if someone's trying to shove something in your face a bit too hard, be wary of their intentions. You may be getting scammed) 
2. **Populism** ( Appealing to as many people as possible and losing its own voice in the process in order to gain attention) 
3. **Mimicry** (Copying aspects without the beliefs that produced it. This is called "posing") 
4. **Chameleonism** (Appeals to fads and trends. This is a sign that it lacks a stable core of authenticity to draw strength from and relies on others to construct its identity. Same problem as mimicry) 
5. **Tackiness** (Gimmicky tricks to appeal or to mimic taste. Tackiness is a symptom of lack of cohesive taste and is more often a sign of an attempt to get attention. If its cringe in tackiness, it's bad quality.) 
6. **Extreme price** ( free/dirt cheap or Overpriced/unaffordable for 99% of people) 
7. **Poor motives** **of production** (popularity, greed, lust etc are the worst motives to make anything. High quality is always an outcome of deep love and passion. Cheap motives are the major driving force of a substandard product) 
8. **Bullshitting** (Lack of proof for tall claims. If the claims are tall but the evidence is small, sniff the air harder) 
9. **Too good to be true** ( If something looks too perfect , it often probably is. ***Always test your products in the real world***)
10. **Market** (You can always judge a product by its consumer. Products know their market fit and make an appeal to it. Quality products have a quality market of individuals you can highly respect) 
11. **Poor Ethics** ( It’s often the case that gift wrapped crap always has its far-from-perfect ethics of production leak out. If you see incidents that make you doubt the intentions of the maker of said product, don’t ignore it. You’ll thank yourself for it later)